Tutorial for stochastic emission of dipoles using reciprocity (#2259)
NanoComp/meep: doc/docs/Python_Tutorials/Custom_Source.md

### Exploiting Reciprocity

Finally, for cases which involve computing the emission from a collection of $N$ random dipoles in a *single* direction, one can exploit [reciprocity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reciprocity_(electromagnetism)) to obtain the same result using a single simulation rather than Monte Carlo sampling of a large number of runs simply by swapping the sources and monitors and running the simulation backwards. This approach is analogous to computing [thermal radiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_radiation) from a blackbody via [Kirchhoff's law for thermal radiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff%27s_law_of_thermal_radiation) which states that emissivity and absorptivity are equivalent under thermal equilibrium. However, the approach demonstrated in this tutorial, which was originally developed for computing the extraction efficiency of LEDs in [Optics Express, Vol. 18, pp. 24522-35 (2010)](https://opg.optica.org/oe/fulltext.cfm?uri=oe-18-24-24522), does not require lossy materials.

> The reciprocal calculation involves two parts: (1) for the simulation, send an input mode in the opposite direction of the output mode of the forward calculation and monitor the DFT fields at the same location as the sources in the forward calculation, and (2) in post processing, evaluate an inner product of the DFT fields using a correlation operator of the random currents. Since the currents are uncorrelated in space and consist only of electric currents (because, in practice, they are generated by LED quantum wells), the correlation operator is a diagonal matrix. Also, since these are 2d simulations with $E_z$ polarization and involve an isotropic dielectric medium, the inner product of the fields is therefore just a sum of $|E_z|^2$ from the DFT monitors (equation 10 of the reference). In 3d, we would need to perform two separate calculations for the $\mathcal{S}$ and $\mathcal{P}$ polarizations. (For the more general case of reciprocity and anisotropic materials, see Section 2.3 of [arXiv:2111.13046](https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.13046).)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reciprocal calculation involves two parts: (1) for the simulation, send an input mode in the opposite direction of the output mode of the forward calculation and monitor the DFT fields at the same location as the sources in the forward calculation, and (2) in post processing, evaluate an inner product of the DFT fields using a correlation operator of the random currents. Since the currents are uncorrelated in space and consist only of electric currents (because, in practice, they are generated by LED quantum wells), the correlation operator is a diagonal matrix. Also, since these are 2d simulations with $E_z$ polarization and involve an isotropic dielectric medium, the inner product of the fields is therefore just a sum of $|E_z|^2$ from the DFT monitors (equation 10 of the reference). In 3d, we would need to perform two separate calculations for the $\mathcal{S}$ and $\mathcal{P}$ polarizations. (For more general cases, including multiple output channels, spatially correlated emitters, anisotropy, and other complications, see Section 2.3 of [arXiv:2111.13046](https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.13046).)
```

    abs_flux = np.zeros(nfreq)
    dft_ez = np.zeros(ndipole,dtype=np.complex128)
    for nf in range(nfreq):
        for nd in range(ndipole):
            dft_ez[nd] = sim.get_dft_array(dft_mons[nd], mp.Ez, nf)
        abs_flux[nf] = np.sum(np.abs(dft_ez)**2)

    return freqs, abs_flux

if __name__ == '__main__':
    fwd_flat_flux = np.zeros((nfreq,ndipole))
    fwd_text_flux = np.zeros((nfreq,ndipole))
    for d in range(ndipole):
        fwd_freqs, fwd_flat_flux[:,d] = forward(d, 2, False)
        _, fwd_text_flux[:,d] = forward(d, 4, True)

    fwd_norm_flux = np.mean(fwd_text_flux,axis=1) / np.mean(fwd_flat_flux,axis=1)

    bwd_freqs, bwd_flat_flux = backward(2, False)
    _, bwd_text_flux = backward(4, True)
    bwd_norm_flux = bwd_text_flux / bwd_flat_flux

    plt.figure()
    plt.semilogy(fwd_freqs, fwd_norm_flux, 'b-', label='forward')
    plt.semilogy(bwd_freqs, bwd_norm_flux, 'r-', label='backward')
    plt.xlabel("frequency")
    plt.ylabel("normalized flux")
    plt.legend()

    if mp.am_master():
        plt.savefig(
            "forward_vs_backward_flux_spectrum.png",
            bbox_inches='tight',
            dpi=150
        )
```

> There are four items to note in this script. (1) Since the exact equivalence between the forward and reciprocal calculations only applies to the continuum model, demonstrating agreement using a discretized model typically requires going to fine grid resolutions. In this example, we found that a resolution of 200 pixels/μm produced results which are sufficiently converged. (2) Measuring the flux in the normal direction in the forward calculation requires [mode decomposition](../Python_User_Interface.md#mode-decomposition) rather than a Poynting flux monitor. (3) To compare the results of the forward and reciprocal calculations, similar to the previous examples, the flux spectrum of the grating structure must be normalized using the flux spectrum of a flat structure. (4) Measuring the emission in the normal direction requires specifying a `k_point` of zero. (For emission at angle $\theta$ from the $+y$ axis, the `k_point` would be $\omega(\sin(\theta),\cos(\theta))$ where $\omega$ is the source/monitor frequency.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are four items to note in this script. (1) Since the exact equivalence between the forward and reciprocal calculations only applies to the continuum model, demonstrating agreement using a discretized model typically requires going to fine grid resolutions.  (In principle, there is an exact discrete version of reciprocity, but that would require more precise attention to how the sources and monitors are discretized.) In this example, we found that a resolution of 200 pixels/μm produced which match between forward and reciprocal calculations (a high resolution is required to accurately resolve sharp resonant effects). (2) Measuring the flux in the normal direction in the forward calculation requires [mode decomposition](../Python_User_Interface.md#mode-decomposition) rather than a Poynting flux monitor. (3) To compare the results of the forward and reciprocal calculations, similar to the previous examples, the flux spectrum of the grating structure must be normalized using the flux spectrum of a flat structure. (4) Measuring the emission in the normal direction requires specifying a `k_point` of zero. (For emission at angle $\theta$ from the $+y$ axis, the `k_point` would be $\omega(\sin(\theta),\cos(\theta))$ where $\omega$ is the source/monitor frequency.)
```
